Another story, right?
The accumulation of opportunities
lead to massive growth.
This is something that I
have experienced in my own.
So, contrasting John's experience,
I found that trust-building
unlocked countless opportunities,
which led to what I perceive to
be massive career growth for me.
So fresh out of my apprenticeship,
I was assigned to a really
difficult client project.
This client was demanding,
the requirements were huge in scope,
the deadlines were extremely tight and
it could not be moved.
And my manager made it clear that she
didn't believe that I had the skills to be
on the team.
She actually singled me out and
had me tested, and
let me know she didn't really trust me.
So this could have easily
gone very badly for me, but
instead of getting upset, I just focused
on delivering high quality work.
And as recommended by my mentors,
still try to build strong relationships
with my manager and my teammates.
And this approach transformed
this potentially tough engagement
into a success story, and
I eventually did earn my manager's trust.
So one specific example stands out in
how I tried to build relationships.
So I needed to work with another engineer,
let's call him Bob,
on something that was
totally blocking my project,
I really needed his part because
my project could not proceed.
But he was struggling
to get his part done.
Instead of getting frustrated and
angry that he wasn't doing the task,
I had a conversation with Bob instead to
understand what was going on for him.
And he explained that he did understand
that this task was really important to me.
He did want to help, but he just could not
help me in the timeframe I was looking for
because he had a bunch of other
things that he had to do.
So hearing this, I spoke with his manager,
not to complain, but
to see if there was any wiggle room
in my task being prioritized instead.
And that approach worked, my task got
prioritized, my project moved forward,
and I maintained a great
relationship with Bob,
which was important [LAUGH] cuz I
needed to continue working with him.
And this wasn't an isolated incident,
I applied the same principle
in all of my interactions,
essentially always looking for
win-win scenarios for everybody involved.
So even though, of course,
I did run into problems,
I ran into blockers, the help I received
from these strong relationships
allowed me to consistently
deliver outstanding work on time.
All of which eventually
earned my manager's trust.
And this initial success was crucial for
my career,
though I didn't know it at the time.
By turning a difficult situation
into a positive outcome,
I began to get assigned to more projects
when went back to my home company.
And I maintained the same
approach on those projects,
deliver excellent work while
fostering good relationships.
That looks like, clear communication,
supporting teammates whenever I could,
looking for those win-win scenarios,
helping B me execute projects
successfully each time.
So each project became an opportunity for
growth of my technical skills and
larger responsibilities.
And then successfully completing those
projects then strengthened my reputation,
leading to even more
opportunities coming my way.
And so this continuous cycle
of trust then opportunities
allowed me to accumulate a huge
amount of new skills and
experiences in a very
short amount of time.
So when I hit that one year mark
at this company, I was like,
I'm gonna go for a senior promotion.
It's probably unlikely, because
I've only been here for a year, but
I'm just gonna try it.
And to my surprise,
I had all of these colleagues,
ex-managers who eagerly supported and
vouched for me.
And with their support and
the experiences that I had gathered to
prove that I could perform at
the next level, I got that promotion.
And the trusts and the relationships I
built continued to open doors for me.
Opportunities kept coming and
I found myself on a fast track,
continuously growing and
taking on new challenges.
So ironically, while I didn't believe
in the importance of relationships,
they turned out to be the very thing
that helped me grow the fastest.
So this approach is something
that you can use too.
But intentionally focusing on building
trust, you can rapidly grow your skills
to take advantage of those opportunities
and climb that career ladder quickly.
Trust me,
it really makes a big difference.
That's the end of this story.
How do you guys feel?
Do you guys relate, agree, disagree?
Yeah, I 100% agree,
I can't talk specifically about the tech
industry roles, cuz I'm still looking for
my first opportunity.
>> Female student 1: But in other work
environments, trust is just essential,
with both teammates and managers, clients,
if you're dealing with them as well,
it's very important.
>> Francesca Sadikin: Yes, I know it's
not something a lot of software engineers
are thinking about in what they
think makes a good career, yes.
>> Male student 1: What qualities
do you look for in a manager and
want to work for, every manager is toxic,
how do you navigate
that type of situation?
>> Francesca Sadikin: If a manager is
toxic, and what I describe as toxic is,
someone who's intentionally
pigeonholing you, as in,
they're constantly only giving you
tasks that limit your abilities.
I would actually try to
transfer to a different team.
That's the type of manager who
already doesn't really like you,
and it's very hard to turn
around that narrative.
And so, instead of trying to
stay there and making it work,
I would continue looking for
another place that helps you grow instead.
Now, if your manager is just someone
who isn't thinking about it,
they're not intentionally
getting in your way, but
they aren't actively
providing you opportunities.
Definitely, the managing up scenario
applies, where you are now like, okay,
hey, I talked to these other engineers,
it looks like maybe they
need help over there.
I'd love to help take on some
of that responsibility, or
you're actively asking managers as
well for more opportunities, yes.
>> Male student 1: How did you know
you were ready for the next level?
>> Francesca Sadikin: Well, [LAUGH] when I
was working on these client engagements,
I was working with a lot of
other engineers and managers.
And when I was having these
casual conversations with them,
they would be like, wait,
you're not a senior?
And I'm like, no, I'm not.
And they're like, you perform at a senior,
[LAUGH] you should go for
senior promotions.
And so I kept getting that feedback,
and that's when I was like,
I'm just gonna go for it.
And then I also could tell from
working with the managers that I was
doing very well.
I was meeting their expectations and
performing exactly where
they wanted me and more.
And so I was, okay,
I think I am performing at the next level,
I'm going to just try it.
Even if maybe I didn't have enough tenure,
years of experience.
>> Male student 1: How do you build these
relationships earlier in your career?
For instance, if you're trying to
find your first opportunity or
even still in university,
>> Francesca Sadikin: How do you build
those relationships?
So it's important to note that when
you're starting off, the types of
relationships that will eventually lead to
opportunities, it's a long game, right?
You won't see the immediate results,
so just keep that in mind, right?
They may not immediately refer you.
But what I like to do is that I take
whatever common context we have.
So for example, if it's another engineer
or another manager, I actually just go
to them with questions or where I'm like,
I clearly have done a lot of the work,
but I'm really asking for
their opinions on something specific.
I would really wanna
hear their thoughts and
experiences on this project or
problems that we're facing, and
then use that as the initial conversation
to get them talking with me.
And then over time if I feel like
that was a really great relationship
that he was starting to form,
I may be coming back and be like, hey,
you told me about that,
let me give you an update on that.
Now the problem is this,
what do you think?
I'm gonna try this other thing, but
I'd love to hear your experience and
your opinions on it.
And so, slowly over time, you keep using
work as the initial set of conversations,
that by going into their experience,
you're naturally going into a little
bit more of their life story.
And you're eventually gonna see them
enough that you've built kind of a natural
relationship with them.
So that's just one way
that I like to do it.
>> Male student 1: Is it possible to
avoid problematic people in a more
systematic way?
>> Francesca Sadikin: What does
problematic people mean in this case?
>> Male student 1: Or
just avoiding problems with people.
>> Francesca Sadikin: Avoiding
problems with people, [LAUGH] well,
you can never control what
another person does, so
I try my best to give them
the benefit of the doubt.
So it's more about how I receive
their actions and their behaviors.
So for example, I've worked with
engineers who are very, very cranky,
[LAUGH] they're a little prickly,
but I think of it as, well,
they're not intentionally
trying to be this way.
Maybe they're stressed or they're just
overwhelmed and they just don't have
enough time, and that's why they're
being a little short with me.
I don't let that bother
how I respond with them.
And I continue being kind and
trying to speak with
them kindly and
just not contribute to the problem,
don't trigger the problem even more.
So to reiterate, the story takeaways
of this first set of stories,
you need opportunities to learn new
skills and take on more responsibilities,
all of which becomes evidence of your
readiness to move to the next level.
You will not be able to get promoted
without this type of evidence.
And so, while some might think
opportunities come randomly, and they do,
some of them do come randomly,
I've learned that they're often also
cultivated through
the people you work with.
So by consistently delivering quality
work and being a great partner in
these opportunities, you foster that
continuous cycle of success and growth,
which leads to accelerated
career progression.
>> Francesca Sadikin: Okay, yes, yes.
>> Male student 1: Do you have any
tips for acting professional and
a team while you have a clash
with another teammate?
>> Francesca Sadikin: How to act
professional [LAUGH] while you
have a clash with the teammates?
Definitely, I think, just like friend
dynamics, you don't wanna drag your
personal problems with someone
into a group dynamic [LAUGH].
And so, if you're having conflict,
I think, and this is not
something you can resolve through
conversations with that actual person.
It may be time to bring it up
to your managers to help mediate
what's going on,
because it should be resolved.
So yeah, if you can't have the
conversation and resolve it together, it's
time to step up, managers are there to
help mediate this type of issue as well.